Title: Criticism of the Indian Government (20241010)
Author: Anirban Chakraborty and Government of India
Date: 2024-08-11

Calcutta High Court Division Bench , APOT 261 of 2024: "Every member of the public has the right to know the truth and if the truth is in the public interest, a member of the public has every right to expose it. If this right is vested in every citizen, such right is vested with more responsibility in the Chief Minister. But expression of this freedom is subject to certain conditions under the law of defamation. The first is that it  should stand the test of justification or truth or must be a fair comment or the maker of the statement must owe a duty to the persons to whom the defamatory statement was published, which is described as qualified privilege. If the maker fails the test he is liable to pay damages in the civil action and may be charged with commission of an offence." " Why don't we Indians protest against the government for what we need ? There was once a crab competition for all countries in the world. All countries sent their crabs to compete. Then someone noticed that the stall from India had a huge box, but it was open. There was no lid for it to keep the crabs in. So people asked the man standing there Why is there no lid for these crabs. They may escape and spread here and there. The man replied , These are Indian crabs. They don’t need a lid. They are too busy pulling each other down.They wont escape." - Quora "6. Crticism of Board/Government :- No employee shall, in any radio or television broadcast or in any document published anonymously or in his own name or in the name of any other person or in any communication to the press or in any other public utterance, make any statement of fact or opinion -  (i) Which has the effect of an adverse criticism of any current or a recent policy or action of the Central Government, State Government, the Board or any other Major Port Trust: provided that in the case of any employee specified in the first proviso to sub-regulation (3) of regulation 1, nothing contained in this regulation shall apply to bona fide expression of views by him as an office bearer of a trade union of such employees for the purpose of safeguarding the service conditions of such employees or for securing any improvement therein;" - THE CALCUTTA PORT TRUST EMPLOYEES (CONDUCT) REGULATIONS, 1987 ----------- Law_of_Crimes-I(Indian_Penal_Code) - Dr. AMBEDKAR LAW UNIVERSITY Tamil Nadu.pdf Section 499 of IPC - The followings are not defamation: "First Exception- Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published- It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for the public good that the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact. Second Exception- Public conduct of public servants- It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. Fourth Exception- Publication of reports of proceedings of courts- It is not defamation to publish a substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court of Justice, or of the result of any such proceedings. (Section 228-A, as inserted by the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1983 makes disclosure of identity of victim in certain offences (rape and sexual exploitation) punishable.) Fifth Exception- Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and others concerned- It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court of Justice, or respecting the conduct of any person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as his character appear in that conduct, and no further. Sixth Exception- Merits of public performance- It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting the merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of the public, or respecting the character of the author so far as his character appear in such performance, and no further. Tenth Exception- Caution intended for good of person to whom conveyed or for public good- It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against another, provided that such caution be intended for the good of the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some person in whom that person is interested, or for the public good." -------- 10th October 2024 Writ Petition (Criminal) 402 of 2024 5. In democratic nations, freedom to express one’s views are respected. The rights of the journalists are protected under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. Merely because writings of a journalist are perceived as criticism of the Government, criminal cases should not be slapped against the writer. --------