Title: Remembering the Father of Indian Constitution - Dr. B R Ambedkar and his Role in Framing Indian Constitution
Author: N. Srikanth
Date: 1950-01-26

India gained the status of free and sovereign nation-state on August 15, 1947 after a long struggle and countless sacrifices. It adopted Constitution on November 26, 1949 which came in enforcement on January 26, 1950. It is often considered as one of the gigantic constitutions in the world which establishes a democratic state. The inception of the Indian Constitution in 1950 was a significant event not only in the political history of India but also in the history of social justice and human rights To write about Dr. B.R. Ambedkar's role in the making of Indian constitution is to write about the history of the debates held in the constitutional assembly. Dr. Ambedkar wanted to give such a Constitution to India as would help establish a new social order based on the lofty principles of social, economic and political justice. Whenever any question arose about the weaker sections of the society, his heart would go out for them and he would try to secure maximum political advantage and protection for them. This was indeed natural for him because he had fought for the uplift of these sections of society during his entire political career. He never concealed this fact from anyone. In fact, he once acknowledged that he had entered the Constituent Assembly solely to protect the interests of the downtrodden people. Let us now see how some of the articles of the Constitution came to be finally framed by the Constituent Assembly. In this research paper I would like to emphasize mostly on the ambedkars role in constitutional assembly debates while framing of Indian constitution. Here, in my research paper I will point out some most important features of the Constitution, viz. the Preamble, the Fundamental Rights, directive principles, and Art-32. N. Srikanth"Remembering the Father of Indian Constitution - Dr. B R Ambedkar and his Role in Framing Indian Constitution" Published in International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (ijtsrd), ISSN: 2456-6470, Volume-2 | Issue-1 , December 2017, URL: http://www.ijtsrd.com/papers/ijtsrd7170.pdf  http://www.ijtsrd.com/humanities-and-the-arts/political-science/7170/remembering-the-father-of-indian-constitution----dr-b-r-ambedkar-and-his-role-in-framing-indian-constitution/n-srikanth