Title: MPhil Thesis Secularism In India
Author: Domenic Marbaniang
Date: 2005-05-10

ABSTRACT This Thesis entitled ‘Secularism in India: A Historical Analysis’ is an analytical account of the historical genesis, development, impact, understanding, and challenges of secularism in the Indian context. This thesis is a study of the various philosophical, economical, political, social, and cultural dimensions of the history of secularism in India. ‘Secularism’ refers to the ideology that facilitates practice without reference to religion of any kind. The title ‘Secularism in India’ points to the geographical limitations of this Thesis to India. ‘A Historical Analysis’ indicates that secularism in India will be studied with reference to its past and present in India keeping within perspective its future in the light of its historical analysis. Secularism first appeared in the West in the classical philosophy and politics of ancient Greece. It disappeared for a time after the fall of Greece but resurfaced after a millennium and half in the Renaissance and the Reformation. The Renaissance revival of classical Greek art and culture and the Reformation insistence on the separation of the state from the Catholic Church, eventually led to the development of secularism and the rise of the modern secular state. As the grip of religion loosened and the autonomy of reason grew in human areas, ideas of freedom, equality, nationalism, and democracy developed. As a result, revolutions broke in at several places. The declaration of the non-involvement of the state in private religious matters, in the first amendment of the American Constitution, displays how far secularism had developed in the West to at last find place in politics. Locke’s theory of natural rights, Montesque’s notion of the separation of powers and the de-centralisation of power, and Rousseau’s Social Contract theory played a major role in the intellectual development that led to the French revolution. The transition of society from its traditional form to its modern secularist form can be accounted as follows. Firstly, religious plurality and the need for religious freedom necessitate a secular state. Secondly, scientific progress has made the theory of divine king or religious politics outdated and barbaric in the modern age. Thirdly, it can be seen that Humanism has taken the place of religion in politics and Individualism has taken the place of traditional authority in society. Finally, Democracy and Constitutional system from the Enlightenment, based on the concept of human rights, have provided valuable checks that ensure that the state does not fall back to despotism and religious warfare. In India, the absence of the transcendent in Charvaka might be reason for its also being called as Lokayata-darsana , meaning philosophical school ‘restricted to the experienced world,’ or ‘secular.’ The religious policies of Ashoka were some of the closest to the modern principles of humanism. Ashoka gave great importance to the ideal of tolerance towards different ideologies and religions. Akbar’s religious policy towards the Hindus was in such a time when religious intolerance was on high and Muslim rule over Hindus was more often of an oppressive kind. Earlier on, only the Muslims were treated as citizens. But Akbar gave equal citizenship status to both Hindus and Muslims. Western secularism found its way into India through the Colonialist Rule. The unification of the nation by the British facilitated the easy spread of modern and secularist ideas in the land. The laws that they enacted were in conformity to the rationality and secularity of modernity as well as those that prompted religious tolerance. In the Colonial Period, Missions played an important role in both the ideological and political development of secularism in India. Their ideological impact in the field of religion came in through their emphasis on rationality of religion and condemnation of superstition. Education played an important role in bringing out this ideological change. Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Sir Syed Ahmad Khan, Rabindranath Tagore, Mahatma Gandhi, and B.R. Ambedkar were some of the many Indians who contributed towards the spread of  secularism in the various fields of Indian society. Religion and secularism played important roles during the Independence Struggle. The final part of the Independence Struggle became greatly associated with symbols; songs and odes on India’s glory were composed and sung, foreign goods were boycotted, and Western clothes cast aside for local dress. Evangelical Christians in Britain strongly backed the national movement for independence in India. Among Indians, the overall concern was for the people of India as a nation; there was never a thought in terms of which religion one belonged to. In other words, the concern was secular; therefore, the movement was also secular. Here could be seen the beginnings of a secular form of nationalism in India. However, this secular form of nationalism soon began to foster racial overtones. While evangelical support had a positive impact on the national movement, the actions of the British in India had a very negative impact on the development of the national movement. The period of 1905 and 1919 also saw the rise of Hindu revivalism, culturalism, and religious politics that opposed the Secular Nationalism of the Indian National Congress. However, after 1919, it was the October Revolution of Russia and Lenin’s socialistic principles that began to influence Indian nationalism. The Russian Revolution of 1917 contributed greatly to the fall of the tide of religious nationalism and communalism in India, which would otherwise have proved fatal to the existence of secularism in India. The protection of the rights of the religious minority, especially the Muslims, was a burning issue in the final phase of the Independence Struggle, eventually ending up in the partition and formation of Pakistan at Independence. The Constitution of India that followed its independence was, obviously, highly influenced by the Constitutions of both America and Great Britain.  The words ‘Sovereign, Socialist ‘Secular’ Democratic Republic’ were substituted for the words ‘Sovereign Democratic Republic’ of the Preamble by the 42 nd amendment of the Constitution in 1976. It did not mean that the State was declared irreligious or godless. It meant that the State was neutral towards religion. Secularism, however, had to accord with the peaceful maintenance of Human rights There were bills and acts in relation to religious conversion even before the independence. Instances are the Raigarh State Conversion Act of 1936 and the Udaipur State Conversion Act of 1946. These laws aimed at eliminating the rural and tribal rights of freedom to conscience and religion. After independence, there have been at least five states (Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Arunachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, and Gujarat) that have enacted laws to either curtail or cease conversions. The opposition of conversion is, evidently, an attempt to destroy the citizen’s right to freedom of religion and desecularize Indian society. Though it is known that this attempt is futile in this globally connected world of information explosion, yet many of the Sangh activists are actively busy in trying to stop conversions, reconvert non-Hindus to Hinduism, and make India a Hindu nation. Such communal or anti-communal activities need to be checked for secularism to survive in India. Democratic government, secular education, written constitution, free press, single families, and increasing globalisation are some reasons why secularism continues to survive in India. The researcher believes that a proper orientation of education, a healthy criticism by the press and media, and promotion of inter-religious understanding can play important roles in the survival of secularism in India.  Thus, secularism will surely live on in India.